# H1 Methodology

How We Analyzed Michigan Child Care Daycare Data

Our reporting relies on data released by the State of Michigan in response to a Freedom of Information Request (FOIA). In March, MuckRock requested data self-reported by providers who applied for two rounds of Child Care Stabilization Grants. The data gave us two glimpses into roughly 5,900 child care providers out of a total pool of roughly 7,900.

Those providers told the state about their current enrollments, as well as about their waiting lists, staffing needs, and expenses. MuckRock used those enrollments to help calculate daycare deserts, which previously had only been calculated with licensed capacity – or the maximum number of children that facilities can legally enroll. Interviews with providers indicated that enrollment numbers offered a more accurate picture of a county’s needs. This is often because facilities are short-staffed, but also because parents can’t afford the service. To calculate deserts, MuckRock stitched enrollments from the 5,900 grant recipients with the licensed capacity of the 2,000 non-applicants. In this way, we assumed an enrolled-to-capacity scenario for centers for which we had no information. As a result, the 18 deserts we identify are a minimum estimate. If we had actual enrollment numbers for every facility in the state, it’s likely we’d see a handful more counties qualify as deserts – already, more than 24 are extremely close to the 3:1 threshold.

# H1 A Note On Previous Desert Estimates

Michigan legislators have publicly quoted a number popularized in 2021, which states that 44% of Michiganders live in a child care desert. That number, calculated by the Michigan League for Public Policy in 2021, actually uses a different definition than the Center for American Progress’s (CAP) definition of a child care desert. MLPP’s deserts include children age 5, while CAP’s (and MuckRock’s) only includes children under 5. The reason for this is because many 5-year-olds spend some, or all, of their year in kindergarten programs. Because MLPP included more children in their analysis, their 2021 report overestimates Michigan child care deserts. Despite that, MuckRock’s analysis uses CAP’s narrower age range, as well as more precise enrollment data, to find at least 7 more deserts than MLPP calculated.
